---
title: 1.2 Algorithms as a technology
id: 20250919114554
tags: []
---

# 1.2 Algorithms as a technology
Computer resources, such as memory and CPU-cycles are not free on unlimited. Therefore, we need to design algorithms that are not only correct, but efficient.

## Efficiency
When looking at the efficiency of an algorithm, we _can_ consider the number of CPU cycles it takes to complete the algorithm, depending on the input size. However, it's a lot more important to consider the general scale of the algorithm, it's order of growth, or just order. This is typically expressed as $n^2$, $log(n)$, and so on. The reason we don't really care about more details than the order of growth is that in practical scenarios this order of growth drawves all other parts of an algorithm in detemining its running time.

A computer slower than most with a poorly implemented sorting algorithm of order $n*log(n)$ will sort 10 million integers many times faster than a computer faster than any exisiting today running a sorting algorithm of order $n^2$.
Since it's often the case that input size is very large, order is what matters. Even when input size is small, this only means that the algorithms running time is insignificant when compared to the rest of the system.

## Algorithms and other technologies
Algorithm is as much an important technology of a system as hardware is. Even though there are many powerful technologies being used, it does nto mean choosing good algorithms is not important. Algorithm design is fundamental, and knowing how algorithms work and how they're designed is important also for choosing good algorithms. All the modern tools, hardware, programming paradigms, etc, rely heavily on many algorithms in their implementation.

Machine learning solves many problems for which it's difficult for humans to solve. For problems we _do_ undestand, however, human designed algorithms generally outperform machine learning lagorithms. Utilizing machine learning also itself involves a ton of algorithms.

Even if a task can be accomplished without much knowledge of algorithms, we can do a lot more and solve bigger problems if we know how to use them efficiently.